						CORE JAVA
1.1 What is Java?
Java is a General Purpose and Object Oriented programming language created by James Gosling from Sun Microsystems in 1991. The first publicly released of Java (Java 1.0) in 1995. Java is Based on "write once, run anywhere" (WORA) Feature, meaning that code that runs on one platform does not need to be recompiled to run on another. Java Programs are compiled to bytecode (.class file) that can run on any Java virtual machine (JVM) regardless of computer architecture.
Java is a programming language and computing platform first released by Sun Microsystems in 1995. It is the underlying technology that powers state-of-the-art programs including utilities, games, and business applications. Java runs on more than 850 million personal computers worldwide, and on billions of devices worldwide, including mobile and TV devices. 


1.2 Features of Java
Java is one of the most popular language in the field of software programming. Because of its large number of important and robust features it is widely accepted in software programming. Java has a large variety of Features.

	Java is -

Object Oriented - In Java, everything is an Object. Java can be easily extended since it is based on the Object model.

Platform Independent - Unlike many other programming languages including C and C++, when Java is compiled, it is not compiled into platform specific machine, rather into platform independent byte code. This byte code is distributed over the web and interpreted by the Virtual Machine (JVM) on whichever platform it is being run on.

Simple - Java is designed to be easy to learn. If you understand the basic concept of OOP Java, it would be easy to master.

Secure - With Java's secure feature it enables to develop virus-free, tamper-free systems. Authentication techniques are based on public-key encryption.

Architecture-neutral - Java compiler generates an architecture-neutral object file format, which makes the compiled code executable on many processors, with the presence of Java runtime system.

Portable - Being architecture-neutral and having no implementation dependent aspects of the specification makes Java portable. Compiler in Java is written in ANSI C with a clean portability boundary, which is a POSIX subset.

Robust - Java makes an effort to eliminate error prone situations by emphasizing mainly on compile time error checking and runtime checking.

Multithreaded - With Java's multithreaded feature it is possible to write programs that can perform many tasks simultaneously. This design feature allows the developers to construct interactive applications that can run smoothly.

Interpreted - Java byte code is translated on the fly to native machine instructions and is not stored anywhere. The development process is more rapid and analytical since the linking is an incremental and light-weight process.

High Performance - With the use of Just-In-Time compilers, Java enables high performance.

Distributed - Java is designed for the distributed environment of the internet.

Dynamic - Java is considered to be more dynamic than C or C++ since it is designed to adapt to an evolving environment. Java programs can carry extensive amount of run-time information that can be used to verify and resolve accesses to objects on run-time.

 

1.4 History of Java
In 1991, a small group of Sun engineers called the "Green Team" believed that the next wave in computing was the union of digital consumer devices and computers. Led by James Gosling, the team worked around the clock and created the programming language that would revolutionize our world - Java. 


1.5 JDK, JRE, JVM
JDK is a software package which is used to develop and deploy java applications.
Java RunTime Environment (JRE) is required to run Java applications interpretively on a target hardware and operating system platform.
A Java virtual machine (JVM) is a virtual machine that can execute Java bytecode. It is the code execution component of the Java platform.There are 5.5 billion JVM-enabled devices according to the Sun Microsystems. 

1.7 Identifiers, Variable, Constant, Keywords & Data types
Identifiers, Variable and Constant reference program locations in computer memory that store values that are related to those identifiers.



		JAVA Objects And Classes

Object - Objects have states and behaviors. Example: A dog has states - color, name, breed as well as behaviors – wagging the tail, barking, eating. An object is an instance of a class.

Class - A class can be defined as a template/blueprint that describes the behavior/state that the object of its type support.

		A class can contain any of the following variable types.

Local variables - Variables defined inside methods, constructors or blocks are called local variables. The variable will be declared and initialized within the method and the variable will be destroyed when the method has completed.

Instance variables - Instance variables are variables within a class but outside any method. These variables are initialized when the class is instantiated. Instance variables can be accessed from inside any method, constructor or blocks of that particular class.

Class variables - Class variables are variables declared within a class, outside any method, with the static keyword.



			Java - Basic Datatypes

Variables are nothing but reserved memory locations to store values. This means that when you create a variable you reserve some space in the memory.

There are two data types available in Java -

1.Primitive Data Types
2.Reference/Object Data Types

	1.Primitive Data Types-
		There are eight primitive datatypes supported by Java. Primitive datatypes are predefined by the language and named by a keyword. Let us now look into the eight primitive data types in detail.

1.byte
2.short
3.int
4.long
5.float
6.double
7.boolean
8.char

	2.Reference Datatypes-
		Reference variables are created using defined constructors of the classes. They are used to access objects. These variables are declared to be of a specific type that cannot be changed. For example, Employee, Puppy, etc.



		Java - Modifier Types

Modifiers are keywords that you add to those definitions to change their meanings. Java language has a wide variety of modifiers, including the following -

1.Java Access Modifiers

2.Non Access Modifiers

To use a modifier, you include its keyword in the definition of a class, method, or variable.

	Example of Modifier

public class className {
   // ...
}

private boolean myFlag;
static final double weeks = 9.5;
protected static final int BOXWIDTH = 42;

public static void main(String[] arguments) {
   // body of method
}


		Java - Loop Control

A loop statement allows us to execute a statement or group of statements multiple times and following is the general form of a loop statement in most of the programming languages -

Loop Architecture
Java programming language provides the following types of loop to handle looping requirements. Click the following links to check their detail.

Sr.No.	Loop & Description
1	while loop
	Repeats a statement or group of statements while a given condition is true. It tests the condition before 	executing the loop body.

2	for loop
	Execute a sequence of statements multiple times and abbreviates the code that manages the loop variable.

3	do...while loop
	Like a while statement, except that it tests the condition at the end of the loop body.


	Enhanced for loop in Java-

As of Java 5, the enhanced for loop was introduced. This is mainly used to traverse collection of elements including arrays.

	Syntax-
Following is the syntax of enhanced for loop -

	for(declaration : expression) {
   		// Statements
	}
Declaration - The newly declared block variable, is of a type compatible with the elements of the array you are accessing. The variable will be available within the for block and its value would be the same as the current array element.

Expression - This evaluates to the array you need to loop through. The expression can be an array variable or method call that returns an array.

Example
public class Test {

   public static void main(String args[]) {
      int [] numbers = {10, 20, 30, 40, 50};

      for(int x : numbers ) {
         System.out.print( x );
         System.out.print(",");
      }
      System.out.print("\n");
      String [] names = {"James", "Larry", "Tom", "Lacy"};

      for( String name : names ) {
         System.out.print( name );
         System.out.print(",");
      }
   }
}


		String


In java, string is basically an object that represents sequence of char values. An array of characters works same as java string. For example:

char[] ch={'j','a','v','a','t','p','o','i','n','t'};  
String s=new String(ch);  
is same as:

String s="javatpoint";  
Java String class provides a lot of methods to perform operations on string such as compare(), concat(), equals(), split(), length(), replace(), compareTo(), intern(), substring() etc.

The java.lang.String class implements Serializable, Comparable and CharSequence interfaces.

string implements serializable, comparable, charsequence
CharSequence Interface

The CharSequence interface is used to represent sequence of characters. It is implemented by String, StringBuffer and StringBuilder classes. It means, we can create string in java by using these 3 classes.

charsequence
The java String is immutable i.e. it cannot be changed. Whenever we change any string, a new instance is created. For mutable string, you can use StringBuffer and StringBuilder classes.

		Java - Arrays

Java provides a data structure, the array, which stores a fixed-size sequential collection of elements of the same type. An array is used to store a collection of data, but it is often more useful to think of an array as a collection of variables of the same type.

	Syntax of Array-
		dataType[] arrayRefVar;   // preferred way.
		or
		dataType arrayRefVar[];  // works but not preferred way.

	Creating Arrays-

You can create an array by using the new operator with the following syntax -

Syntax-

arrayRefVar = new dataType[arraySize];


The above statement does two things -

1.It creates an array using new dataType[arraySize].

2.It assigns the reference of the newly created array to the variable arrayRefVar.

Declaring an array variable, creating an array, and assigning the reference of the array to the variable can be combined in one statement, as shown below -

dataType[] arrayRefVar = new dataType[arraySize];



		Java - Collections Framework

1.The framework had to be high-performance. The implementations for the fundamental collections (dynamic arrays, linked lists, trees, and hashtables) were to be highly efficient.

2.The framework had to allow different types of collections to work in a similar manner and with a high degree of interoperability.

3.The framework had to extend and/or adapt a collection easily.

Towards this end, the entire collections framework is designed around a set of standard interfaces. Several standard implementations such as LinkedList, HashSet, and TreeSet, of these interfaces are provided that you may use as-is and you may also implement your own collection, if you choose.

A collections framework is a unified architecture for representing and manipulating collections. All collections frameworks contain the following -

Interfaces - These are abstract data types that represent collections. Interfaces allow collections to be manipulated independently of the details of their representation. In object-oriented languages, interfaces generally form a hierarchy.

Implementations, i.e., Classes - These are the concrete implementations of the collection interfaces. In essence, they are reusable data structures.

Algorithms - These are the methods that perform useful computations, such as searching and sorting, on objects that implement collection interfaces. The algorithms are said to be polymorphic: that is, the same method can be used on many different implementations of the appropriate collection interface.


		Interface in Java

The interface in java is a mechanism to achieve abstraction. There can be only abstract methods in the java interface not method body. It is used to achieve abstraction and multiple inheritance in Java.
Java Interface also represents IS-A relationship.It cannot be instantiated just like abstract class.

	Why use Java interface?

There are mainly three reasons to use interface. They are given below.

1.It is used to achieve abstraction.
2.By interface, we can support the functionality of multiple inheritance.
3.It can be used to achieve loose coupling.


		Example of interface

interface MyInterface
{
   public void method1();
   public void method2();
}
class XYZ implements MyInterface
{
  public void method1()
  {
      System.out.println("implementation of method1");
  }
  public void method2()
  {
      System.out.println("implementation of method2");
  }
  public static void main(String arg[])
  {
      MyInterface obj = new XYZ();
      obj. method1();
  }
}


